The current increase in onion price is not surprising. What is surprising is the reaction of our policy makers and even the common man. Everybody knows the price increase happened due to India's export ban. Bangladesh being the chief importer of onion from India and good chunk of demand is being met from that import, its no wonder that Bangladesh experiences price hike when India bans export. Its economics 101, India's ban reduces imports, creates shortage in local market, drives up the prices. 

But our response to India's step is quite baffling. Our politicians are kind of upset like you are upset with your lover or friend, he/she could not have done this to me like attitude. General public ramps up the anti-India sentiment. Nothing does not make any sense. 

India does what she feels the best for her. We have to remember, onion price is a very sensitive issue in India's politics. Few elections have been won and lost on failing to control the price of onion. The most famaous or infamous was India's parliamentary election of 1980, famously known as 'onion election'. Before running into the election, as a caretaker government's head, Charan Singh was contesting with his party `Lok Dal` against Indira Gandhi. Indira Gandhi was trying to bounce back from her ignominious defeat back in 1976 when she was ousted after calling in emergency. Before the 1980 election, in election campain Speeches, Indira Gandhi used to wear onion garlands before appearing into those campaigns. Her election rhetoric was most of the time full of the utter failure of current government in controlling spiraling onion price. 

Indira Ghandhi's Congress(I) did a landslide victory in that election.Among 520 seats, her party won close to 400 seats where Lak Dal won only 39 seats. This is one of the biggest win for Congress in its entire history, only comparable to Jawharlal Nehru's win in 1952 in the backdrop as hero of the independce from colonial rule of British Raj.

Then there were state elections of Delhi and Rajasthan in 1998. BJP has first come into the power. Atal Bihari Bajpayee just in recent months successfully completed Neuclear tests and was riding high in a victorious sentiment agains arch rival Pakistan. But they were also brought down by a lowly onion, when prices started to go up. A planning commission member of India once mentioned that to a substantial part of the population of India onion price is the main indicator of inflation. A person's well of is gauged by his ability to buy onion, if he/she can buy onion its fine, if not then then its not good. 

That's the great implication of onion price on India's mass perception. Therefore, its no wonder that India reacts heavily to any hint in the price of onion. But its not that India's policy of controlling export is without any criticism. Particularly this policy is heavily criticised among the farmers. In one of the news, I have seen that a farmer said, when there is bumper harvest and the price falls, then government does not come along and purchase the onions at a high price.

Anyway, that is what belongs to India's internal market management. In the case of Bangladesh, the onion price is not that sensistive but its an important daily product no doubt. After Bangladesh produce [what's the amount] it imports [ what's the amount] a large amount of onion from India. India is producer of more than 1/5 of total onion production in the world. Out of this production, more than 50 percent in produced in three states Maharashtra, Karnataka and Gujrat. Whenever some weather related disaster happens in these states, prodution of onion is reduced. As a result, supply in the market is disrupted and price of onion starts to go up. As a result Indian government, for the reasons above, takes quick action. Either they set high minimum exports price or totally shuts down exports. As a result price remains low in Indian market. and Its is not without its criticism as mentioned above.

The way Bangladesh reacts to this policy of India is amusing at best and frustrating at its worst. Policy makers at the beginning shows kind of angry reaction. With kind of jilted lover attitude, they say India could have not done so. Then when get over this, they jump over the businessmen, fines them, incarcerates them. After all these measures, when they see that price of onion is not coming down, they announce they are looking for exports in new destination. But it usually is too late. Price only starts to come down after the production comes into November or after India relaxes or withdraws its export ban.

What happens in the mean time is people suffer. In Bangldesh, the well-offs, elites can do away with a high price of onion but many poverty stricken people can not. Particularly, those with businesses running small restaurants, its a really big burden. But from the government level there is no systematic response to this yearly event.

Its mind boggling that people in the highest possible desicion making do not understand that you just can not control a market by punishing businessman. The market can only be controlled by the playbook of a market. Particularly in a competitive market. Onion has the all the hallmark of a textbook case of nearly perfectly competitive market. It has identical products, many buyers and sellers and free entry and exit. An individual businessman has very limited power to control the market.

Therefore its foolish to look for syndicate in a highly competitive market such as onion. Rather, look at the source of the problem. The problem stems from the fact that there is some serious imbalance in the supply and demand. Whenever supply exceeds demand price starts to fall, whenever supply falls below demand, price starts to go up. If government starts to increase supply in the market, there is no reason why the price will start to go down.

Therefore, its high time the policy makers starts to look into this crucial aspect of the market. Try to have proper estimates of supply and demand. Difficult part is the demand. It needs to dig deeper into the food habits of individual and requires intensive research. One source of that might be HIES expenditure survey which is done every five years and looks into detail food habit of people.

Compared to estimating demand, estimating supply is relatively easy. Its all about how efficiently governments extension offices are working. If they are working rightly they should have regular estiamtes of what is the total production of onion, how many acres of landed are being devoted to onion this year. Import of onion is very easy, it has measures right into the system. 

If the government keeps a close eye on the supply and demand situation, it can easily develop an early warning system where any such situation can be prevented. Remember this year, the businesses had a fairly advanced knowledge compared to government. Even before the India's export ban came into effect on Sep 14, they started to put extra LC orders. If businessman can know in advance what is going to happen why the government won't be able to do it not understandable. 

Let's have an estimate of 2



