DU/effective_teaching.md, before:

I planned to respond to these historic document earlier but some tragic news struck us and I thought it was not appropriate to discuss those issues at that time.

First I would like to thank Akash sir wholeheartedly for sharing this historic document. Some of us might consider ourselves bigshot researchers, academicians, activists, politicians what not but our first and the most valuable identity is teachers. If we fail in this department then we are a total failure. That's what I perceived always and I always strived to maitain the highest possible quality. But I had long way to go be an inspiring and effective teacher, lot to learn, lot to experience but my aspirations were cut short some of my collegues in this department. 

Now back to this document. Its amazing how each component of this document is relevant till today. Its 40 year old document but its relevance is still intact. The teaching deficiency and malpractices it mentioned, its still very much existed today. I wrote seven letters where some of those issues were specifically mentioned while Professor Nazma Begum was the chairperson. The consequence of sending those letters were forcing me to forced leave for the second time. 

In my sporadic and short tenure, in the academic meeting I seldom found teachers talk about teaching effectiveness, how to improve. Raising questions about other teachers' teaching ability or process is completely anathema. I think there is some sort tacit collusion among ourselves of turning the other way when comes to gross negligence of teaching ethics. 


I have seen a senior teacher finished a course in 6 to 8 classes in a semester. Another senior teacher teaches an advanced macro course year after year in this department allegedly by the students superficially and she frequently cancels classes. In total, she takes classes around half of the regular classes in regular basis. There are teachers who did not have their own rooms in this department. I have seen them go straight to classes from their cars and then again back to car. When they have time, they may show their face in the chairman's room or sit around with collegues over a cup of tea. Absolute no office hours year after year. There are gross allegation about script checking. 
I have seen senior teachers don't want to even teach one single course. They coopt a junior teacher, who does the bulk of the work. Even if a s

Having said that, I believe most of the teachers in this departement are well meaning and dedicated to their work. The examples I have given above is minority. But one thing is common in all of us is that we rarely talk about these issues. We do not want to disturb the status quo in the fear that there might be blowback which can harm oneself. 

I think the document sent by Akash Sir is very relevant and should be taken very seriously. My suggestions would be to form another committee consisting of junior teachers who will be assured of working freely, independently and without any repercussions and intimidation. I have found younger factulties to act very timidly, subserviently which is not conducive for free, academic environment. 

I think its about time we make meaningful changes to this departement. Its about time.

Commit message:

first draft of financial express write-up

DU/effective_teaching.md, after:

I planned to respond to these historic document earlier but some tragic news struck us and I thought it was not appropriate to discuss those issues at that time.

First I would like to thank Akash sir wholeheartedly for sharing this historic document. Some of us might consider ourselves bigshot researchers, academicians, activists, politicians what not but our first and the most valuable identity is teachers. If we fail in this department then we are a total failure.

Now back to this document. Its amazing how each component of this document is relevant till today. Its 40 year old document but its relevance is still intact. The teaching deficiency and malpractices it mentioned, its still very much existed today across many departments in public universities across the countries. In fact, I wrote seven letters where some of those issues were specifically mentioned while Professor Nazma Begum was the chairperson. We all know what was the consequence of that sorry episode.

The overarching problem that I find is that there is no accountability structure which periodically and systematically monitors to ensure effective teaching. There is absolutely no mechansim in this university where a teacher is punished for bad teaching where rewarded for excellent teaching. Our promotion does not depend on teaching qulity or record. Our promotion criterion says, you write bunch of trash papers we really don't care and that's it. If your department is happy with you sometimes even you don't need that. In these environment, what happened is that absolute travesty of teaching happened in this University and some also in this department. Having said that I have to mention there has been lots of dedicated and excellent teachers in the university and in economics departmemnt. But I think substandard situation outweighs the excellence. I would like to specifically mention few events which went totally unnoticed. 

In each of this event no teacher was let alone punished or rebuked. It was totally ignored or defended by some of the  fellow teachers.

I have seen a senior teacher finished a course in 6 to 8 classes in a semester. Even in a primary school this kind of event is unheard of. And here we are talking about an advanced course in an University.  

Another senior teacher teaches an advanced course year after year in this department allegedly by the students superficially and she frequently cancels classes. In total, she takes classes around half of the regular classes in regular basis. 

There are teachers who did not have their own rooms in this department. I have seen them go straight to classes from their cars and then again back to car. When they have time, they may show their face in the chairman's room or sit around with collegues over a cup of tea. Absolute no office hours year after year. 

There are senior teachers don't want to even teach one single course. They coopt a junior teacher, who does the bulk of the work. I wonder how come these malpractice, travesty of teaching ethicts is done year after year. Every month they draw a salary over lac taka. I think the amount of effort these teachers give, in terms of per unit effort, it is one of the highest paid teaching job in the world, being such kind of professor in the department of Economics in Dhaka university.

Having said that, I believe most of the teachers in this departement are well meaning and dedicated to their work. The examples I have given above is minority. But one thing is common in all of us is that we rarely talk about these issues. We do not want to disturb the status quo in the fear that there might be repercussions or consequences. 

In this background, I think the document sent by Akash Sir is very relevant and should be taken very seriously. My suggestions would be to form another committee consisting of junior teachers who will be assured of working freely, independently and without any repercussions and consequences. I have found younger factulties to act very timidly, subserviently which is not conducive for free, academic environment. Its very for younger faculties to break out of the teacher-student they are so used to year after year. In that regard, I think 40 years back, junior faculties were quite bold to come up with such document. 


Anyway, let's keep on discussing on this issue. Discussion on teaching ethics, discipline, accountability should be the high priority in this department and in fact the whole university. I thank once again Akash Sir for initiating discussion with this historic piece of document. 

Its about time things change.
